---
type: article
title: "About Control-Escape"
date: "2011-06-03T22:50:00-0400"
params:
  author: "Vince Veselosky"
  copyright: "Â© 2011 Vince Veselosky"
  contact: "<vince@control-escape.com>"
---

## Our Mission

_To foster, educate and expand the Open Software community._ At Control-Escape, our goal
is to help bring new citizens to the open software community, a cultural group existing
mostly on the Internet and based on the values of cooperation, sharing, and technical
excellence. We seek not just the spread of open software, but of the values inherent in
the open software community.

We don\'t go around trying to enlist new recruits. Our community isn\'t like that (or
shouldn\'t be, at least). We simply spread the word, figuring that if we build it, you
will come. But once you come for a visit, we will try our best to make your stay
pleasant, to make you want to live here.

As with any move to a new community, there is a period at the beginning when you don\'t
know your way around. We try to alleviate that \"lost puppy\" feeling by providing you
with the information you need to find your own way. Unlike many other resources,
Control-Escape is designed to be accessible to the novice, the new and prospective user,
as well as the power user.

We believe that the GNU/Linux operating system is the best place to begin, and most of
the information here is about Linux. However, Linux is not the only open software
around, and many of our articles will be useful no matter which operating system you are
using. In the true spirit of open software, all our articles and tutorials will be
published to the web and accessible free of charge.

Finally, this web site is for _you_, the new (or prospective) Linux user. If there is
any question you need answered, any article you would like to see published here, please
contact us at the address below with your request.

## Why Call It Control-Escape?

I struggled for a long time to come up with a name for this site. A name that would be
recognizable, revealing the spirit of my intent. I went through a dozen or more, most of
them impossibly long. I thought about cutesy abbreviations, but that didn\'t work out
either. Finally I decided to just put it out of my mind for a while, knowing that the
best way to find an answer sometimes is not to look for it.

I was thinking about my reasons for adopting Linux, the same reasons that most new users
are doing it now. I wanted to get away from Microsoft\'s kingdom of mediocrity. I wanted
to have control over my own computer. I wanted to climb out of Windows and stand in the
Sun (sorry, stretched that metaphor a little too far). I wanted to _escape_ the world of
proprietary corporate software, and take _control_ of my own digital destiny. It\'s
about Control and Escape.

And then I thought, hey, those are both keys on my keyboard. Pressing Ctrl-Esc on
Windows is the same as clicking the Start button. What better place to Start than
Control-Escape!?

So that\'s how I arrived at the name, and that\'s what the focus of this site will be.
We are here to help you take control of your computer, make it do what you want it to
do. I\'m not asking \"Where do you want to go today?\" You know where you\'re going.
What you need to know is _how to get there_.

## Is Control-Escape for Me?

There are dozens if not hundreds of Linux sites out there now, and many other sites
about Open Source and Free Software in general. Many of these sites provide amazing
amounts of detailed technical information. Unfortunately, most of it is so technical
that you have to be an expert already to understand it. Where are the references for the
true novice? There are a lot of people out there who have only used Windows, and we want
something better. We know how to use a mouse and a keyboard, but that doesn\'t mean we
understand the ext2fs file system and cron jobs. Yet many \"help\" documents assume this
type of knowledge.

Control-Escape is a web site for _normal_ people. We have computers that came with
Windows pre-installed and we\'ve been using them. We might like Windows, we might not,
but we are interested in finding something better, in both the technical sense and the
ethical sense. We shop around, and Linux looks like the best prospect. We try to adopt
it, and then we hit a wall, a mountain of technical knowledge so large we cannot figure
out where to begin.

The goal of this site is to get you over that hump, the beginning period when the change
seems hardest. It will give you the knowledge that you need to decode all the
technobabble and learn for yourself. It will take you from knowing nothing at all (a bad
feeling, I know) to being clueful, and then to being powerful, capable of making a
system perform to your specifications. When you are finished, your computer will do what
_you_ want it to, not what Mr. Bill wants.

And believe me, it isn\'t that hard. A few basic principles are all you need to get
started. Soon it will seem like second nature. True, it won\'t come without effort. But
gaining this kind of control is well worth it.

## Who\'s Behind Control-Escape?

**Vince Veselosky, Publisher/Editor**

In 1998 Vince was a Microsoft Certified Professional who defected to Linux. He started a
Linux help web site immediately after adopting Linux, finding that some basic operations
were very simple but not clearly documented. Feedback was so strong that in January,
1999 he registered a domain name and launched Control-Escape as a public resource for
the community. Vince now makes his living as a web application architect, building large
scale web sites on Linux and open source technologies. He can be reached via email at
vince -@-control-escape.com.
