---
type: article
title: "Managing Software with urpm"
date: "2011-06-03T22:52:22-0400"
tags:
  - outdated
params:
  contact: "<vince@control-escape.com>"
---

Mandriva\'s `urpm` (\'User RPM\') tackles several weaknesses of the lower-level `rpm`
tool. It provides a system of automatically solving dependencies by offering to install
or uninstall dependent packages. RPM only tells you which files are missing or which
packages would be broken. It stores a full dependency set of any given location. RPM
only stores data of locally installed packages. If configured, it fetches packages from
the network upon installation, if they are newer than the packages on the installation
media. It also allows easier and more extensive package queries, automated updates and
more.

`urpm` isn\'t meant as a replacement for RPM, it is meant to make common RPM tasks
easier. In many ways it resembles the package tool the of the Debian GNU/Linux
distribution, [APT](/linux/lx-swinstall-apt).

## Configuring `urpm`

The central configuration file is `/etc/urpmi/urpmi.cfg`, the flat text data files are
located in `/var/lib/urpmi`, the log files in `/var/log`.

You can put certain packages on \'hold\' to prevent them being updated by adding the
package names to the file `/etc/urpmi/skip.list`, one name per line. For example, you
might want to prevent installing newer `kernel` or `glibc` packages by adding those
names to the file.

The file `/etc/urpmi/inst.list` lists all packages which should be installed rather than
upgraded. It is preconfigured to exclude all kernel RPMs, to prevent overwriting a
running kernel and thus possibly crippling your system. You probably will not need to
change this.

When you\'ve installed your system from CDs, these will most likely already be indexed
by `urpm`. To add more installation media (other CDs, local directories, remote
directories), use `urpmi.addmedia`. Let\'s say you have a local \'rpms\' directory in
your home directory where you keep downloaded RPMs. To add this directory to the urpm
database, run (as [SuperUser](/linux/users-groups#becoming-superuser)):

    [root]# urpmi.addmedia local file://home/user_name/rpms

\'local\' is the nick name under which this resource can be referred to in the future.
Update the data base with the data from the new \'local\' resource:

    [root]# urpmi.update local

Now the packages in \'rpms\' are part of the urpm database and taken into account during
all urpm operations. Don\'t forget to run `urpmi.update` if the content of that
directory changes (the same goes for all resources with non-static content like FTP
directories).

For remote package resources you _have_ to provide the relative path to the `hdlist.cz`
catalog file on that server (relative from the directory where the RPMs are, that is) in
the \'base\' directory. You can not add remote resources to urpm unless they provide
that dependency file. :

    [root]# urpmi.addmedia contrib ftp://ftp.sunet.se/pub/Linux/distributions/mandrake/9.1/contrib/RPMS with ../../i586/Mandrake/base/hdlist2.cz

There are some tools that can make this easier. If you are running a graphical
interface, you can use Mandriva\'s Software Manager to add and remove media, install
packages, etc. There is also a web tool called
[Easy urpmi](http://www.linuxfordummies.org/addmedia/) that will help you locate mirrors
and generate the `urpmi.addmedia` commands for you to cut and paste.

To remove a resource from urpm, run (as [SuperUser](/linux/users-groups#becoming-superuser)):

    [root]# urpmi.removemedia ${resource_name}

`urpm` consists of a set of tools, each performing a certain task (in contrast to
\'rpm\', which works entirely via options).

## Installing And Removing Packages

These commands require [SuperUser](/linux/users-groups#becoming-superuser) privileges.

To install a package, use the `urpmi` command. For example, to install the \'mc\'
package:

    [root]# urpmi mc

`urpmi` will check if this package is available and either download it (if it\'s on a
remote resource) or prompt you for the removable medium the package is on or simply
install it from the hard disk. If the package needs other packages, `urpmi` will ask you
if it is OK to install these, too. If you don\'t want to be asked, add the `--auto`
option.

In case the package name you provide is ambiguous, `urpmi` will print a list of all
matching package names and exit. You can modify this behavior by using the `-a` option:

    [root]# urpmi -a gtk

for instance will install _all_ packages whose names contain the string \'gtk\'. (Use
with caution, this may install more than you expect!)

Another useful option is `-p` which allows to filter packages by what they provide.
Example: Let\'s say you know you need the \'libe2p.so.2\' program library, but you do
not know which package provides that library:

    [root]# urpmi -p libe2p.so.2

makes `urpmi` check which package provides that library and install that package, in
this case \'libext2fs2\'.

Of course, you can also use it to simply install a local package file like you would do
with `rpm -U`. Notice that `urpmi` always **upgrades** if it finds an newer version of
the package than the one currently installed. Sometimes this is not the behavior you
want, e.g. when you need two different versions of the same program library. In these
cases, you must use `rpm -i`.

To uninstall packages, you use `urpme`:

    [root]# urpme ${package}

If uninstalling the package would break dependencies of other packages, `urpme` asks if
these should be removed, too. If you don\'t want to be asked, add the `--auto` option.
(You should only use this option if you _really_ know what you are doing.)

`urpme` also accepts the `-a` option:

    [root]# urpme -a gtk

removes all installed packages whose names contain the string \'gtk\'.

## Querying Packages

Another area where the `urpm` system really shines is querying, since the `urpm`
database also contains information about packages which are not installed. The `urpm`
query tool is `urpmf`. [SuperUser](/linux/users-groups#becoming-superuser) privileges are not
required.

    [root]# urpmf ${file}

lists all packages in its database which contain the file \${file}.

`urpmf` supports a lot of options which allow to query certain fields of package
information. You want to know what packages containing games are available?

    [root]# urpmf --group Games

How big is the \'pingus\' package? :

    [root]# urpmf --size pingus
     pingus:size:11026299

What is this package about?

    \[root\]# urpmf \--summary pingus
    : pingus:summary:Pingus - A free Lemmings clone

Have a look at `man urpmf` for more query options.

There\'s another urpm query command called `urpmq`, which is only of limited interest,
though.

    # List packages with names containing ${string}
    [root]# urpmq ${string}
    # Show the resource where ${package} is located
    [root]# urpmq --sources ${package}
    # List other packages that ${package} depends on
    [root]# urpmq -d ${package}
    # List other packages that depend on ${package}
    [root]# urpmq -r ${package}

Other options are listed in `man urpmq`.

## Getting Updates

The urpm system allows you to update your system with the latest security and bug fixes
via the command line or even automatically, provided you have added at least one mirror
to your `urpmi.cfg` with `urpmi.addmedia`.

The updating command is very simple

    [root]# urpmi --auto-select --update

checks all configured resources for updated packages, lists them and asks if they should
be installed. If you don\'t want to be asked, add the `--auto` option. This option is
also convenient when you want you want to run the update via a cron job. Do not forget
to run `urpmi.update` to refresh the resource database.

## History

This article is based on earlier work by Tom Berger entitled \"MUO -Basics - RPM III\"
obtained via MadrakeUser.org in 2002, and released under the terms of the
[GNU Free Documentation License](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.txt). The site is now
gone, but the knowledge lives on. Thanks for your contribution, Tom.

The article was modified and retitled (as required by the FDL absent special permission)
to \<cite\>Managing Software with urpm\</cite\>, and republished on
[Control-Escape.com](http://www.control-escape.com). Control-Escape changes were made in
2006 by Vincent Veselosky.
