---
type: article
title: "Compiling Linux Software from Source Code"
description:
  "How to take a tar ball of source code, compile it, and install it on any linux
  system. Cut and paste examples provided."
date: "2011-06-03T22:48:43-0400"
params:
  author: "Vince Veselosky"
  copyright: "Â© 2011 Vince Veselosky"
  contact: "<vince@control-escape.com>"
---

A computer program is a list of instructions given to a computer to make it perform a
specific task or series of tasks. Computers do not understand English (we all wish that
they did!), so programmers must communicate these instructions to the computer in a
language the computer understands. Computers, however, can only operate on numbers,
which makes a computer\'s language very difficult for humans to understand.

The solution to this problem is to create an intermediate language that both humans and
computers can understand. These are called programming languages. Programmers create a
list of instructions for the computer in a programming language such as C, Pascal, or
Fortran. This list of instructions is known as "source code". It is textual in nature,
and readable to humans (who speak the language). Programmers do all their work in this
source code, changing the instructions to fix bugs, add features, or alter the
appearance of a program.

When the programmer believes he has perfected the instructions for his program, he uses
a special program called a compiler to translate his human readable text instructions
into computer readable numbers that correspond to the same instructions. The resulting
file is usable by computers but incomprehensible to humans. This is called object code.
The resulting executable file is often called binary, after the number system used by
the computer. This translation from source code into binary object code is a one-way
process. It is impossible to translate a binary executable back into the original source
code.

The binary executable is what you need if you want to run and use a program. This is
commonly what you will receive when you purchase shrink-wrapped software from a retail
store. The source code is what you need if you want to understand how a program works
internally, or if you want to change, add to, or improve a program. If you have the
source code and an appropriate compiler, you can produce the binary executable, but the
reverse is not true.

If you\'ve downloaded a source code archive, you\'ll have to compile it before you can
install it. In the top level directory of your extracted source, there is usually a
README or INSTALL file that gives you instructions on how to compile and install the
package. Some instructions are better than others, and rarely will they tell you
everything you need to know. Hopefully this guide will help fill in some of the blanks.

## A Quick Example

A typical incantation to install a source package looks something like this. :

    [root]# tar -xzvf ${name}.tar.gz
    Unpacking ...
    [root]# cd ${name}
    [root]# more README
    [root]# more INSTALL
    [root]# ./configure
    [root]# make
    [root]# make install

## Unpacking the Archive

    [user]$ tar -xzvf ${filename}.tar.gz
    [user]$ tar -xjvf ${filename}.tar.bz2
    [user]$ tar -xvf ${filename}.tar
    [user]$ unzip ${filename}.zip
    [user]$ unzip ${filename}.exe

Depending on the type of archive you have received, the command for unpacking it may
differ slightly. Shown above are some popular examples. `tar` is a Unix utility (Tape
ARchiver) for working with bundled file archives. Typical command switches are `x` to
extract files, `v` for verbose mode so you can tell what\'s going on, `f` indicating
there will be a filename to follow. If the file name ends in `.tar` that is all you
need, but usually the tar file has been compressed with another utility. Files ending in
`.gz` were compressed with `gzip`. For those, add the `z` flag to the list of
parameters. Files ending with `.bz2` were compressed with the `bzip2` utility. For
those, add the `j` flag, or failing that, `--bzip2`.

Occasionally you will run into an archive delivered in a `.zip` file. Use the `unzip`
utility to unpack these. (Note that you may have to install the unzip package first.)

Some files you download may be built into self-extracting zip archives that end in
`.exe` extension. Usually `unzip` can unpack those files as well, but be warned that
anything packaged this way is almost certainly meant for a Windows machine and not your
Linux box. Programs packaged this way probably will not run on Linux. But you might have
an archive that contains only fonts or documentation, and those should be okay.

## Configuring

The typical steps to configure and install software are these. :

    [root]# ./configure --help
    [root]# ./configure
    [root]# ./configure --prefix=/home/vince

Why do you type \"dot slash configure\" instead of just \"configure\"? Because the
configure script is in the current directory, represented by the dot. By default, Linux
does not search the current directory for executables; you must explicitly tell it where
to look. (This is a security feature.) If you don\'t type the dot slash, you\'ll get an
error like \<samp\>bash: configure: command not found\</samp\>, and may spend hours
pulling your hair out trying to figure out why.

The primary job of the configure script is to detect information about your system and
\"configure\" the source code to work with it. Usually it will do a fine job at this.
The secondary job of the configure script is to allow you, the system administrator, to
customize the software a bit. Running `./configure --help` should give you a list of
command line arguments you can pass to the configure script. Usually these extra
arguments are for enabling or disabling optional features of the software, and it is
often safe to ignore them and just type `./configure` to take the default configuration.

There is one common argument to `configure` that you should be aware of. The `--prefix`
argument defines where you want the software installed. In most source packages this
will default to `/usr/local/` and that is usually what you want. But sometimes you may
not have root access to the system, and you would like to install the software into your
home directory. You can do this with the last command in the example,
`./configure --prefix=/home/${vince}` (where \${vince} is your user name).

## Compiling, Installing and Uninstalling

    [root]# make
    [root]# make install
    [root]# make uninstall

The next step is to invoke the GNU Make utility to read the Makefile and compile the
program for you. Unlike the Linux shell, `make` _does_ look in the current directory for
its Makefile, so you needn\'t specify anything else. You should be aware that compiling
software can take a long time. Compiling a simple program may take only a minute or two,
but if you are planning to compile all of KDE from source, you may have to wait hours or
even _days_ depending on the speed of your computer. Also, it is not at all unusual to
see hundreds of compiler warnings scroll by while software is compiling. If you are
lucky, the software will compile anyway.

Assuming the compile phase completes without error, the next step is to actually install
the software using `make install`. This invokes the `make` utility again, this time
using it to copy the newly compiled files where they need to be in order to run your
program. (See [Where did the files go?](lx-swinstall-where)) With some programs, you can
remove the installed files using `make uninstall` as well, but this is not universal.

Most errors you will bump into while compiling have to do with missing libraries that
the software depends on. Every case is unique, but watch for \"not found\" or \"unable
to locate\" phrases. Typically you just need to install the \"development\" versions of
the libraries it needs. These are usually available from your operating system vendor
packages. Search for packages with names ending in \"-devel\".
