---
type: article
title: "What is Free/Libre, Open Source Software?"
description: "What open-source means, why it is important, and where to learn more"
date: "2011-06-04T10:03:10-0400"
params:
  author: "Vince Veselosky"
  copyright: "Â© 2011 Vince Veselosky"
  contact: "<vince@control-escape.com>"
---

In the simplest terms, open source software is _software you can share_. But it is more
than just _shareware_. Open source means that the `source code` of the software is
available to the users. To understand what this means, we\'ll need to take a little
detour into how computer programs actually get made.

<!--more-->

## How Computer Programs Are Made

A computer program is a list of instructions given to a computer to make it perform a
specific task or series of tasks. Computers do not understand English (we all wish that
they did!), so programmers must communicate these instructions to the computer in a
language the computer understands. Computers, however, can only operate on numbers,
which makes a computer\'s language very difficult for humans to understand.

The solution to this problem is to create an intermediate language that both humans and
computers can understand. These are called `programming languages`. Programmers create a
list of instructions for the computer in a programming language such as C, Pascal, or
Fortran. This list of instructions is known as `source code`. It is textual in nature,
and readable to humans (the ones who speak the language). Programmers do all their work
in this source code, changing the instructions to fix bugs, add features, or alter the
appearance of a program.

When the programmer believes he has perfected the instructions for his program, he uses
a special program called a `compiler` to translate his human readable text instructions
into computer readable numbers that correspond to the same instructions. The resulting
file is usable by computers but incomprehensible to humans. This is called
`object code`. The resulting executable file is often called `binary`, after the number
system used by the computer. This translation from source code into binary object code
is a one-way process. It is impossible to translate a binary executable back into the
original source code.

The _binary executable_ is what you need if you want to run and use a program. This is
commonly what you will receive when you purchase shrink-wrapped software from a retail
store. The _source code_ is what you need if you want to understand how a program works
internally, or if you want to change, add to, or improve a program. If you have the
source code and an appropriate compiler, you can produce the binary executable, but the
reverse is not true.

## So, What is Open Source Again?

Software that is available only in binary executable format is _proprietary software_.

Open-source software is copyrighted software that is distributed _as source code_, under
a license agreement which grants special rights to users of the software, rights that
are normally reserved for the author. Such a license allows all users to make and
distribute copies of the software binaries and source code, without special permission
from the author. Furthermore, it allows users to _modify_ the source code, and
distribute modified copies.

## What Does It Mean?

So what, you say? Why is Open Source important? Because it means that any programmer,
anywhere in the world, can look at the source code, fix bugs and errors, add new
features, and customize the system without limits. That is exactly how Linux has been
developed from the beginning, and that is why Linux is a very stable system with few
bugs, wide hardware support, and a feature set growing so fast that proprietary
operating system vendors are jealous. The fact that the source code is open to review by
experts all over the world ensures that any problems are found and solved quickly, and
the fixes can be distributed without restriction. This is much more effective and
efficient than relying on a corporation to squeeze a \"service pack\" somewhere into its
busy release schedule. (After all, they don\'t get paid for service packs.)

What really matters is that open source software is _community owned_. It is software
that is maintained by the community of people (or companies) that use it. It is freely
available on the Internet, and anyone may use it. More importantly, users are encouraged
to improve upon it. By sharing our improvements and ideas, pooling our resources with
thousands, even millions of others around the world via the Internet, the open source
community is able to create powerful, stable, reliable software, at very little cost.

But the open source community is much larger than just the people who write the
software. Everyone who uses the software participates in a _real_ community and has a
voice in its direction. You don\'t have to be a programmer. By merely reporting a bug to
a program\'s author, or writing a simple \"how-to\" article, you contribute to the
community and help to make the software better. Open-source software is written,
documented, distributed and supported by the people who use it. That means that it is
sensitive to your needs, not the needs of a corporation trying to sell it to you.

Of course, many companies also contribute to the development of open-source software,
making their work available to the entire community, because they know the benefits of
Open Source. Software that is supported by an entire community is by its nature better
and more stable, and more and more companies are beginning to appreciate that fact.

The bottom line is that open source software is written by people who use it every day,
people who have a personal interest in making it work and work well. They aren\'t trying
to add buzzword features, they are trying to add _quality_. They don\'t spend time and
money trying to convince people that their software is great, they spend it trying to
_make_ their software great.

## Resources

\"Open Source\" is a [trademark](http://www.opensource.org/trademark-guidelines) phrase
describing software licenses that meet the
[Open Source Definition](http://www.opensource.org/osd.html). The trademark is
administered by the [Open Source Initiative](http://www.opensource.org), an organization
founded on the principles of cooperation that launched Linux and the free software
movement. Only software that meets the criteria described in the Open Source Definition
may describe itself as Open Source.

Long before the term \"open source\" came into use, there was a community of people
devoted to the idea of \"Free Software\", a phrase which refers not to cost, but to the
freedom to use and modify it (think of free as in \"free speech\", not \"free beer\").
This community still actively promotes the ideals of Free Software. To learn more about
it, visit [The Free Software Foundation](http://www.fsf.org/).

For a detailed examination of how and why open source software is developed, read Eric
S. Raymond\'s excellent essay
[The Cathedral and the Bazaar](http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar).

If you\'re considering open source software for your business, you should visit
[The Open Source Initiative](http://www.opensource.org/) to find out more. If you\'re
not considering it, you probably should be. Take a look anyway, and learn how the open
source community can add stability, scalability, and power to your business, while
actually reducing expenses.
