Control-Escape Copyright License
==============================================================================
Unless otherwise noted, all textual material on this web site is Copyright 
Â©1998-2012 by Vincent Veselosky, and is licensed under the `Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/>`_.

Some of the articles provided by Control-Escape may have been authored elsewhere. These
articles will carry their own copyright notice and license terms separate from
that described in the site footer or this page. Please respect the original
author's copyright license in any case.

In order to facilitate free sharing of information, Control-Escape content may
also be used under the terms of the `GNU Free Documentation License
<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html>`_, so that it may be combined with
other documents licensed under the FDL. Note, however, that this exception
only applies to text authored by Vincent Veselosky and licensed under the
Creative Commons license referenced above. Articles distributed on
Control-Escape.com but authored elsewhere can be used *only* under the
terms specified by the original author.  Creative Commons is our preferred
license, so please use the FDL only if you must combine Control-Escape content
with other content in a way that is incompatible with the Creative Commons
license or the FDL.

Previously, this material was made available subject to the terms and
conditions set forth in the `Open Publication License, v1.0
<http://opencontent.org/openpub/>`_. If you obtained a copy of this material
under that license prior to October 2006, you may continue to use it under
those terms. However, newer versions of Control-Escape content are licensed
under the Creative Commons terms described above.

If you have any questions regarding use of this material that are not answered
here, please feel free to contact the publisher via email at
vince -@- control-escape.com The author will be happy to customize the
material for publication as needed. The author is also happy to host
translations, if anyone is willing to provide them.

