:description: How to take a tar ball of source code, compile it, and install it on any Linux system. Cut and paste examples provided.
:Author: Vince Veselosky
:Copyright: Â© 2011 Vince Veselosky
:Contact: vince@control-escape.com
:Date: 2011-06-03T22:48:43-0400

Compiling Linux Software from Source Code
================================================================================
A computer program is a list of instructions given to a computer to make it
perform a specific task or series of tasks. Computers do not understand
English (we all wish that they did!), so programmers must communicate these
instructions to the computer in a language the computer understands.
Computers, however, can only operate on numbers, which makes a computer's
language very difficult for humans to understand.

The solution to this problem is to create an intermediate language that both
humans and computers can understand. These are called programming languages.
Programmers create a list of instructions for the computer in a programming
language such as C, Pascal, or Fortran. This list of instructions is known as
`source code`:dfn:. It is textual in nature, and readable to humans (who speak
the language). Programmers do all their work in this source code, changing the
instructions to fix bugs, add features, or alter the appearance of a program.

When the programmer believes he has perfected the instructions for his
program, he uses a special program called a `compiler`:dfn: to translate his
human readable text instructions into computer readable numbers that
correspond to the same instructions. The resulting file is usable by computers
but incomprehensible to humans. This is called `object code`:dfn:. The
resulting executable file is often called `binary`:dfn:, after the number
system used by the computer. This translation from source code into binary
object code is a one-way process. It is impossible to translate a binary
executable back into the original source code.

The binary executable is what you need if you want to run and use a program.
This is commonly what you will receive when you purchase shrink-wrapped
software from a retail store. The source code is what you need if you want to
understand how a program works internally, or if you want to change, add to,
or improve a program. If you have the source code and an appropriate compiler,
you can produce the binary executable, but the reverse is not true.

If you've downloaded a source code archive, you'll have to compile it before
you can install it. In the top level directory of your extracted source, there
is usually a README or INSTALL file that gives you instructions on how to
compile and install the package. Some instructions are better than others, and
rarely will they tell you everything you need to know. Hopefully this guide
will help fill in some of the blanks.

A Quick Example
********************************************************************************

A typical incantation to install a source package looks something like this. ::

    [root]# tar -xzvf ${name}.tar.gz
    Unpacking ...
    [root]# cd ${name}
    [root]# more README
    [root]# more INSTALL
    [root]# ./configure
    [root]# make
    [root]# make install

Unpacking the Archive
********************************************************************************
::

    [user]$ tar -xzvf ${filename}.tar.gz
    [user]$ tar -xjvf ${filename}.tar.bz2
    [user]$ tar -xvf ${filename}.tar
    [user]$ unzip ${filename}.zip
    [user]$ unzip ${filename}.exe

Depending on the type of archive you have received, the command for unpacking
it may differ slightly. Shown above are some popular examples. `tar`:kbd: is a
Unix utility (Tape ARchiver) for working with bundled file
archives. Typical command switches are `x`:kbd: to extract files,  `v`:kbd:
for verbose mode so you can tell what's going on, `f`:kbd: indicating there
will be a filename to follow. If the file name ends in `.tar`:kbd: that is all
you need, but usually the tar file has been compressed with another utility.
Files ending in `.gz`:kbd: were compressed with `gzip`:kbd:. For those, add
the `z`:kbd: flag to the list of parameters. Files ending with `.bz2`:kbd:
were compressed with the `bzip2`:kbd: utility. For those, add the `j`:kbd:
flag, or failing that, `--bzip2`:kbd:.

Occasionally you will run into an archive delivered in a `.zip`:kbd: file. Use
the `unzip`:kbd: utility to unpack these. (Note that you may have to install
the unzip package first.)

Some files you download may be built into self-extracting zip archives that
end in `.exe`:kbd: extension. Usually `unzip`:kbd: can unpack those files as
well, but be warned that anything packaged this way is almost certainly meant
for a Windows machine and not your Linux box. Programs packaged this way
probably will not run on Linux. But you might have an archive that contains
only fonts or documentation, and those should be okay.

Configuring
********************************************************************************

The typical steps to configure and install software are these. ::

    [root]# ./configure --help
    [root]# ./configure
    [root]# ./configure --prefix=/home/vince

Why do you type "dot slash configure" instead of just "configure"? Because the
configure script is in the current directory, represented by the dot. By
default, Linux does not search the current directory for executables; you must
explicitly tell it where to look. (This is a security feature.) If you don't
type the dot slash, you'll get an error like <samp>bash: configure: command
not found</samp>, and may spend hours pulling your hair out trying to figure
out why.

The primary job of the configure script is to detect information about your
system and "configure" the source code to work with it. Usually it will do a
fine job at this. The secondary job of the configure script is to allow you,
the system administrator, to customize the software a bit. Running
`./configure --help`:kbd: should give you a list of command line arguments you
can pass to the configure script. Usually these extra arguments are for
enabling or disabling optional features of the software, and it is often safe
to ignore them and just type `./configure`:kbd: to take the default
configuration.

There is one common argument to `configure`:kbd: that you should be aware of.
The `--prefix`:kbd: argument defines where you want the software installed. In
most source packages this will default to `/usr/local/`:kbd: and that is
usually what you want. But sometimes you may not have root access to the
system, and you would like to install the software into your home directory.
You can do this with the last command in the example, `./configure
--prefix=/home/${vince}`:kbd: (where ${vince} is your user
name).

Compiling, Installing and Uninstalling
********************************************************************************
::

    [root]# make
    [root]# make install
    [root]# make uninstall

The next step is to invoke the GNU Make utility to read the Makefile and
compile the program for you. Unlike the Linux shell, `make`:kbd: *does* look
in the current directory for its Makefile, so you needn't specify anything
else. You should be aware that compiling software can take a long time.
Compiling a simple program may take only a minute or two, but if you are
planning to compile all of KDE from source, you may have to wait hours or even
*days* depending on the speed of your computer. Also, it is not at all unusual
to see hundreds of compiler warnings scroll by while software is compiling. If
you are lucky, the software will compile anyway.

Assuming the compile phase completes without error, the next step is to
actually install the software using `make install`:kbd:. This invokes the
`make`:kbd: utility again, this time using it to copy the newly compiled files
where they need to be in order to run your program. (See  `Where did the files
go? <lx-swinstall-where.html>`_) With some programs, you can remove the
installed files using `make uninstall`:kbd: as well, but this is not
universal.

Most errors you will bump into while compiling have to do with missing
libraries that the software depends on. Every case is unique, but watch for
"not found" or "unable to locate" phrases. Typically you just need to install
the "development" versions of the libraries it needs. These are usually
available from your operating system vendor packages. Search for packages with
names ending in "-devel".
